# UK-Road-Safety-M.Sc.-Thesis-
The main research question for this project is to identify whether the historical data related to road safety and accidents for Great Britain help in predicting the likelihood of the severity of an accident and the details about the casualties for a specific location with particular circumstances.
The objectives of the research are:
•	To analyse the historical data and study the impact of various conditions such as weather, lighting, road surface and any other special condition on the severity of the accident to understand the need of any infrastructural changes and spread awareness in areas more prone to accidents
•	To visualize the accident hotspots on the map of Great Britain and graphically represent various statistics regarding the accidents and casualties
•	To predict the details about future accidents including the severity, the number of casualties and vehicles, the gender of the casualties and the average age of the casualties
•	To implement machine learning algorithms related to classification and regression for predictive analytics domain of the project
•	To suggest future work which can be carried out based on the findings of this research project

Abstract:
Every year thousands of people in the United Kingdom lose their lives due to accidents.  According to the 2018 annual report on the reported road casualties in Great Britain issued by the Department for Transport, a total of 1,784 road deaths were reported in 2018 which was similar to the observed level of road deaths since 2012.  Therefore, it is essential to analyse the data related to the accidents to understand the relationship between various conditions on the road and the severity of an accident.  By recognizing those factors that have the most impact on accidents, people could be more cautious on road and avoid accidents in future.  The exploratory data analysis and descriptive analysis of the historical data is aimed towards the identification of these factors and conditions to spread awareness among the commuters.
Through the prediction for the severity of an accident in future, the governing bodies related to the healthcare could provide appropriate service and take necessary actions to reduce the chances of death in road accidents. Moreover, if additional information such as the number of casualties, their gender and average age could be predicted in advance, early and proper medical care could be administered to them in time which could save their lives.  The prediction for number of vehicles involved in an accident in future could help the authorities in being prepared for the removal of damaged vehicles from the roads to avoid disruption in the flow of traffic.  These analyses could be useful to an array of experts, including forensic scientists, forensic engineers or health and safety advisers.  This research is aimed to analyse Great Britain’s road safety data from 2015 to 2018 issued by the department for transport of the UK to identify the conditions present during most severe accidents and accidents in general with the help of data visualization techniques.  The project aims to predict the severity of future accidents, the number of casualties and vehicles related to future accidents, the majority gender of casualties for future accidents and the average age of casualties for future accidents based on the information available from the historical data.

Conclusion:
The analysis of various factors related to accident location revealed the areas where more work needs to be done from an infrastructural point of view as well as public awareness point of view.  The predictions for accident severity and gender of the casualties were accomplished successfully.  The predictions for the number of casualties and the number of vehicles were difficult to realize since the target variable was mainly comprised of same value for the majority of the samples.  The prediction for the average age of casualties was also not accomplished satisfactorily since there seemed to be a lack of relationship between the independent and the dependent variables. 
The limitations of this research project include the unavailability of the data related to those accidents that were not reported to the police such as accidents on private property or parking lots.  Since the data used for this project belonged to the United Kingdom, the findings of this work are limited only to the UK unless the research is repeated using the data from other parts of the world.  The predictive tasks that aimed to predict the exact count or value of target variables (regression tasks) did not meet the expectation as they simply predicted the majority of future values as the mean of the target variable in most of the test cases.
Overall, this project was a great learning experience which involved all the aspects of a typical data analytics project.  Some challenges faced during the completion of the project involved the presence of mixed data type in the accident index which resulted in the creation of incorrect data for models but was rectified later by converting the entire column to string data type.  The data preparation phase, especially the creation of casualty gender and average casualty age columns from the casualty data for each accident index, took much longer time than expected since the computation had to be carried out for each iteration of the accident index.  This project aimed to predict the exact severity class out of ‘Fatal’, ‘Serious’ or ‘Slight’ whereas, previous work done in this regard only classified accidents as fatal or non-fatal.  The regression objectives of this project were also not seen in any work before this project based on the literature review conducted by the author.  However, the findings of this research project suggest that the reason these objectives were not attempted before is due to the lack of relationship between the target and the input variables.
